---
layout: post
title: "Markdown article example"
author: thomas_reinholdsson
excerpt: "A ton of text to test readability."
categories: articles
tags: [r,test]
comments: false
share: false
---

# Coldbir

Coldbir is a column database in R. The main purpose of this package is to simplify the workflow with panel data on disk, including features such as:

- Simple syntax to work with data
- Small storage size
- Impressive read and write speed
- Variable documentation
- Support for various data types

## Getting started

The package is currently not available on `CRAN`, therefore make sure to use `devtools` when installing the package:

    devtools::install_github('SwedishPensionsAgency/Coldbir')

Then, to access or create a database, one has to first initialize a connection:

    library(Coldbir)
    a <- cdb('mydb')
    
The package make use of *get* and *put* methods to read and write data, somewhat simplified the syntax is `a[] <- x` to put some data (`x`) on to the disk and then `a[]` to read the same data from disk. The `[]` notation is used for data selection, e.g. to define which variable and dimensions to read, see the API section for more details.

## Introduction

The Coldbir database could be seen as a large table including a lot of columns. The data itself is stored as a [column-oriented DBMS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Column-oriented_DBMS), where each individual column, also called `variable`, has its own folder including data, documentation and lookup files. A variable data could also be divided into different dimensions (e.g. months and years), hence making it possible to store time series data. *As a notation, this feature could also be used to improve read performance by pre-aggreggating values into years, when data is originally divided into months.*

Below is an example of a database, named *mydb*, including variables on `income` and `unemployment` and year-month as dimensions:

    mydb/
      income/
        data/
          d[2012][12].cdb.gz
          d[2013][12].cdb.gz
        documentation.json
        lookup.txt
      unemployment/
        data/
          d[2012][12].cdb.gz
          d[2013][12].cdb.gz
        documentation.json
        lookup.txt

The database stores a config file to keep track of variable length, when it was lastly changed (database version) and some additional database specific options. Also worth to mention, when initalizing a new database connection it read the config file and create an in-memory list representation of all variables and dimensions available within the database. This causes the inital connection to be a bit slow, but allows much faster queries.

### Variable documentation

An additional feature is to add documentation to a variable. This is simply done by first creating an object of the `doc` class and then assign it to a variable:

    a['foo'] <- doc(
      'Foo' = 'This is a variable', 
      'Info' = list(
        'Stats' = paste('The minimum value is', min(1:10)),
        'Source' = "Some db"
      )
    )

As one may notice, the doc object is build up as a list, which makes it simple to include variable statistics that updates when running the above code. Then, to use the documentation:

    d <- a$get_doc("foo")
    d$Info$Stats
    # [1] "The minimum value is 1"

### Supported data types

The package currently support the following data types:

- `integer`
- `double`
- `logical`
- `factor`
- `Date`
- `POSIXct` / `POSIXlt`

Timezones are not supported. All timestamps are written as `GMT` without timezone conversion. E.g. `2013-04-29 01:00:00 CST` is stored (and returned) as `2013-04-29 01:00:00 GMT`. `POSIXlt` is automatically converted to `POSIXct`.
